hello my name is Alex I'm one of the
expert teachers here at E to language
and I also used to be an IELTS examiner
so in this session I want to talk about
IELTS speaking and explain to you and
show you how an examiner gives you a
score in one of the criteria and I'm
also going to show you what you can do
to improve your band score in that
particular area let's start by having a
look at the criteria this is what it
looks like this is the public band
descriptors you can find that document
by following the link in the blurb below
but basically an examiner gives you four
separate scores for your speaking exam
you get a score for fluency and
coherence lexical resource that means
vocabulary and grammatical range and
accuracy the fourth one is pronunciation
so if you're aiming at band 7 you need
to get 7 in all four criteria or you
need a band 8 to balance out a band 6
this is how it works
either speaking and also in the writing
click the link on the screen if you want
to see our video about how your writing
is scored so in this session today this
video I want to focus on the first
criterion which is fluency and coherence
let's look at the fluency and coherence
criterion it's a little bit difficult to
distinguish between these two points but
I want to focus mostly on the fluency
aspect to begin so let's start by
zooming in on the fluency and coherence
criterion I'm looking here at band 7 6 &
5 with all the descriptors the reason
I've got all three here 7 6 & 5 is
because if you're aiming at band 7
there's actually not that in that much
information in that section about what
you need to do it's more important or
more useful to look at them 6 and look
at band 5 and see the things that you
should avoid doing so let's do that so
within each band there are two or three
points and some of them relate to
fluency some of them relate to coherence
so I'm gonna start with the fluency one
along here then seven first bullet point
speaks at length without noticeable
effort or loss of coherence that
obviously it mentions the word coherence
here but really this bullet point is
about fluency speaking at length without
noticeable effort another aspect of
fluency in band 7 may demonstrate
language related hesitation at times or
some repetition or self correction so
it's okay to have some language related
hesitation you might be for instance you
might be thinking of the verb tense or
looking for a particular word and
examiner can see that you have a slight
hesitation there that's still okay to
score band 7 down at band 6 is willing
to speak at length though may lose
coherence at times due to occasional
repetition self correction or hesitation
so see the distinction here between
speaks at length without noticeable
effort in band 7 and is willing to speak
at length though may lose coherence at
times due to repetition self correction
or hesitation down at band 5 meanwhile
usually maintains flow of speech but
uses repetition self correction and/or
slow speech to keep going so the
difference for here really with the
first bullet points it comes down to
effort so band 7 you need to show the
examiner that this is easy for you that
this is not a struggle to answer these
questions there 6 the examiner can
probably see that you are hesitating a
little bit you sometimes get a bit stuck
you might self-correct a little bit too
much but it doesn't impact your
communication too badly down at band 5
those things repetition hesitation they
are starting to affect your the message
that you're trying to communicate so
it's having a negative impact on your
communication a band 5 there's one more
feature produce a simple speech fluently
but more complex communication causes
fluency problems so perhaps the speaker
can manage simple language but when
thing
get a bit more complex then fluency
drops let's go up and have a look at
what happens in band
Asia band 9 band 8 sir speaks fluently
with only occasional repetition or self
correction hesitation is usually content
related and only rarely to search for
language so there's a slight distinction
here between looking for
sorry hesitating because you're looking
for an idea which is okay and hesitating
because you're looking for language
which may impact your score so if you're
thinking about a question or showing the
examiner that you're giving it a little
bit of consideration that's different to
pausing or hesitating because you forgot
a word or you're not sure of the verb
tense up a bear 9 speaks fluently with
only rare repetition or self correction
so the difference between those 7 8 & 9
in terms of fluency is that in band 7
there is some hesitation or repetition
up to about 8 is occasional and Ben 9 is
rare so it's a very minimal distinction
that's why you can see a little bit of
variation in people's scores up at those
high levels where an examiner is making
a very difficult choice between rare and
occasional let's give it a try
I'm gonna give you three questions and I
want you to pause the video grab your
phone and a voice recorder app or your
video whatever you like and I just want
you to answer the questions imagine that
you're in the speaking test once you've
done that push stop I'm going to show
you a checklist after and I want you to
assess yourself so you can start to get
a feeling for where you would fall in
terms of fluency between 5 6 7 8 and 9
pause the video now and answer these
questions remember to record yourself
when you're ready let's move on to the
checklist
as you listen back to your recording go
through these points related to fluency
give yourself a tick or a point if you
think you did it first one is I speak
fluently without noticeable effort did
you do that
I hesitate only when looking for ideas
not language I speak with minimal
repetition and I rarely need to correct
myself if you gave yourself a tic for
all of those well done you're on track
for about seven eight or nine so now
let's turn our attention to the
coherence aspect of this criterion and
again let's start with band seven six
and five so we're looking at some
different bullet points here band seven
uses a range of connectives and
discourse markers with some flexibility
so connectives and discourse markers
these are the words or the phrases that
sort of stitch your answers and your
ideas together so there are things like
on the one hand on the other hand
despite this having said that one of the
main reasons is in contrast those kind
of words those kind of expressions are
connectives and discourse markers so
band 7 uses a range with some
flexibility then six uses a range of
connectives and discourse markers but
not always appropriately so maybe you're
using some of them in the wrong way and
then five may over use certain
connectives and discourse markers this
is quite a common problem and can cause
even a very good speaker to drop to a
band five if you are only using a couple
of connectives and two of the biggest
ones I notice and and then so if you're
answering and and and and and or then
then then then then you're not showing
range of connectives and discourse
markers so keep that in mind as we do
our next recording
let's look at the higher band levels
here bed 8 develops topics coherently
and appropriately this is the first time
we get any mention of topic development
up in band 8 so it's actually no mention
of it in the bands 7 6 & lower than that
up at Bayer 9 speaks coherently with
fully appropriate cohesive features so
the cohesive features that's the
connectives and discourse markers and
develops topics fully and appropriately
so again here we're talking about topic
development as you can see some of the
distinguishing features between down 7
and then 8 relate to topic development
so that's why it's a good idea even in
part 1 of your speaking test to try and
give quite expanded answers don't just
give a simple response wherever possible
try and bring more into it so bring the
past and the present or compare your own
opinion with other people's opinion
those kind of extension methods will
really help you to push up into the band
8 and bear 9 area so let's have another
go I want you to try these questions
again we're gonna use the same questions
you've already answered these questions
before so in this second try your
fluency should already be better there
shouldn't be so much hesitation not much
repetition not much self correction so
now we're thinking about coherence how
well you develop your ideas how well you
stitch together how well you use your
connectives and discourse markers so
let's do it again grab your phone and
try for round 2 pause the video now and
answer the questions don't forget to
record yourself
and now let's go through the rest of the
checklist as you listen back think about
these points give yourself a tick if you
did it
did you speak coherently and use
appropriate connecting words did you
develop your topics fully and
appropriately and did you speak at an
appropriate pace I've added that one in
there because bad five mentions slow
pace as a crutch so speaker who is using
slow speech to sort of disguise their
lack of fluency so that's something else
to consider as you're speaking of course
not speaking too quickly
but also be conscious of not speaking
too carefully or too slowly because that
can affect your fluency and coherence
score so let's have a look at the full
checklist here so do you speak fluently
without noticeable effort do you
hesitate
only when looking five years and not
language is your repetition minimal do
you really need to correct yourself are
you speaking coherently
it all makes sense and you're using
appropriate connecting words are you
developing your topics fully and
appropriately are you speaking at an
appropriate pace so the big question is
how to improve as you listen back to
your recordings perhaps you're feeling
like I'm not at a seven yet so I'm going
to tell you three things that you can do
to try and boost your fluency and
coherence as you prepare for the exam
the first one is to practice and record
yourself just like we did here today if
you want some IELTS speaking topics we
have a list of 20 themes with part one
and part three questions included follow
the link in our blurb below recording
yourself is a really really useful way
to pick up on your weaknesses and
overcome them
the second thing you can do is to mimic
mimic means copy so
if you find for example a TEDTalk try to
copy the way that the speaker speaks and
this also includes listening carefully
and maybe reading the transcript so try
to see how this speaker connects their
ideas what are the linking words and the
discourse markers that they use to
compare to contrast to provide examples
to give their opinion to agree disagree
to speculate all of those things take
note of the exact words that they use
and try to mimic them try to incorporate
that when you're practicing speaking and
the final thing and this is important as
your exam is approaching is to immerse
in English so this means that for a
short period of time so let's say well
as long as possible but at least a few
days before your speaking test you
should try to remove all access to your
own language of course this is difficult
if you don't live in an english-speaking
country but it's important that you're
having a lot of English input into your
ears into your eyes coming out of your
mouth and as you're writing as well if
you turn up to the IELTS speaking test
and you haven't spoken English for a
week or even for two days it's
immediately clear to the examiner if you
imagine that you're preparing for a
maths test and you spend weeks and weeks
maybe years of your life reading about
history and listening to things about
history and watching movies about
history and then you arrive at your
maths test how available is that maths
knowledge gonna be it's not going to be
front of your mind and it's the same
thing when it comes to the language if
you're constantly surrounded by your own
language your English is not going to be
available to you so sometimes I feel
like the person that I was examining
that English was down in their toes it
was not available not coming to them
quickly if you've been speaking
English for days and days you're
dreaming in English you're doing
everything in English and the examiner
asks you questions in English your
language is much more available it's
much more readily accessible and that's
what you need to show the examiner to
get bound 7 remember that first bullet
point can speak at length without
noticeable
effort so keep that in mind as you're
preparing for the test if you can try to
eliminate all access to your own
language for as long as possible in the
lead up to your speaking exam you can
get more help with us at e tu language
comm come and check out our courses live
classes tutorials and heaps more be sure
to subscribe like comment and share this
video with your friends and we'll see
you soon on e tu language comm thank you
for watching see you next time bye
[Music]